=head1 NAME

sys.ops - System Interaction Opcodes

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Operations that allow the user to interact with the system.

When making changes to any ops file, run C<make bootstrap-ops> to regenerate
all generated ops files.

=over 4


=cut

=item B<spawnw>(out INT, in STR)

Spawn a subprocess whose program name and arguments are contained in the string
$2 and wait for it to finish. The return status, which is very
system-dependent, goes in $1.

=item B<spawnw>(out INT, invar PMC)

Spawn a subprocess whose program name and arguments are contained in the array
$2 and wait for it to finish. The return status, which is very
system-dependent, goes in $1.

TT #847: C<spawnw()> should itself handle splitting up command-line arguments,
rather than depending on the shell to do so in potentially unsafe manner.
See https://trac.parrot.org/parrot/ticket/847.

TT #848: C<spawnw()> should return something less system-dependent, and more
object-like. See https://trac.parrot.org/parrot/ticket/848.


=cut

=item B<err>(out INT)

Store the system error code in $1.

=item B<err>(out STR)

Store the system error message in $1.

=item B<err>(out STR, in INT)

Get the system error message for the system error code $2
and store it in $1.


=cut

=item B<time>(out INT)

Puts the current system time (represented as a whole number of seconds)
in $1.


=cut

=item B<time>(out NUM)

Puts the current system time (represented as a number of seconds, with
microseconds) in $1.


=cut

=item B<sleep>(in INT)

=item B<sleep>(in NUM)

Sleep for $1 seconds.


=cut

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2001-2009, Parrot Foundation.

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software. It is subject to the same license
as the Parrot interp itself.


=cut

