=head1 NAME

string.ops - String Opcodes

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Operations that work on strings, whether constructing, modifying
or examining them.

=over 4


=cut

=item B<ord>(out INT, in STR)

The codepoint in the current character set of the first character of string $2
is returned in integer $1.
If $2 is empty, an exception is thrown.

=item B<ord>(out INT, in STR, in INT)

The codepoint in the current character set of the character at integer index $3
of string $2 is returned in integer $1.
If $2 is empty, an exception is thrown.
If $3 is greater than the length of $2, an exception is thrown.
If $3 is less then zero but greater than the negative of the length of $2,
counts backwards through $2, such that -1 is the last character,
-2 is the second-to-last character, and so on.
If $3 is less than the negative of the length of $2, an exception is thrown.


=cut

=item B<chr>(out STR, in INT)

The character specified by codepoint integer $2 is returned in string $1.


=cut

=item B<chopn>(inout STR, in INT)

Remove n characters specified by integer $2 from the tail of string $1.
If $2 is negative, cut the string after -$2 characters.

=item B<chopn>(out STR, in STR, in INT)

Remove n characters specified by integer $3 from the tail of string $2,
and returns the characters not chopped in string $1.
If $3 is negative, cut the string after -$3 characters.


=cut

=item B<concat>(inout STR, in STR)

=item B<concat>(invar PMC, in STR)

=item B<concat>(invar PMC, invar PMC)

Modify string $1 in place, appending string $2.

=item B<concat>(out STR, in STR, in STR)

=item B<concat>(invar PMC, invar PMC, in STR)

=item B<concat>(invar PMC, invar PMC, invar PMC)

Append string $3 to string $2 and place the result into string $1.


=cut

=item B<repeat>(out STR, in STR, in INT)

=item B<repeat>(invar PMC, invar PMC, in INT)

=item B<repeat>(invar PMC, invar PMC, invar PMC)

Repeat string $2 integer $3 times and return result in string $1.
The C<PMC> versions are MMD operations.


=cut

=item B<repeat>(invar PMC, in INT)

=item B<repeat>(invar PMC, invar PMC)

Repeat string $1 number $2 times and return result in string $1.
The C<PMC> versions are MMD operations.


=cut

=item B<length>(out INT, in STR)

Calculate the length (in characters) of string $2 and return as integer $1.
If $2 is NULL or zero length, zero is returned.

=item B<bytelength>(out INT, in STR)

Calculate the length (in bytes) of string $2 and return as integer $1.
If $2 is NULL or zero length, zero is returned.


=cut

=item B<pin>(inout STR)

Make the memory in string $1 immobile. This memory will I<not> be moved
by the Garbage Collector, and may be safely passed to external libraries.
(Well, as long as they don't free it) Pinning a string will move the contents.

$1 should be unpinned if it is used after pinning is no longer necessary.


=cut

=item B<unpin>(inout STR)

Make the memory in string $1 movable again.
This will make the memory in $1 move.


=cut

=item B<substr>(out STR, in STR, in INT)

=item B<substr>(out STR, in STR, in INT, in INT)

=item B<substr>(out STR, inout STR, in INT, in INT, in STR)

=item B<substr>(inout STR, in INT, in INT, in STR)

=item B<substr>(out STR, invar PMC, in INT, in INT)

Set $1 to the portion of $2 starting at (zero-based) character position
$3 and having length $4. If no length ($4) is provided, it is equivalent to
passing in the length of $2. This creates a COW copy of $2.

Optionally pass in string $5 for replacement. If the length of $5 is
different from the length specified in $4, then $2 will grow or shrink
accordingly. If $3 is one character position larger than the length of
$2, then $5 is appended to $2 (and the empty string is returned);
this is essentially the same as

  concat $2, $5

Finally, if $3 is negative, then it is taken to count backwards from
the end of the string (ie an offset of -1 corresponds to the last
character).

The third form is optimized for replace only, ignoring the replaced
substring and does not waste a register to do the string replace.


=cut

=item B<index>(out INT, in STR, in STR)

=item B<index>(out INT, in STR, in STR, in INT)

The B<index> function searches for a substring within target string, but
without the wildcard-like behavior of a full regular-expression pattern match.
It returns the position of the first occurrence of substring $3
in target string $2 at or after zero-based position $4.
If $4 is omitted, B<index> starts searching from the beginning of the string.
The return value is based at "0".
If the string is null, or the substring is not found or is null,
B<index> returns "-1".


=cut

=item B<sprintf>(out STR, in STR, invar PMC)

=item B<sprintf>(out PMC, invar PMC, invar PMC)

Sets $1 to the result of calling C<Parrot_psprintf> with the
given format ($2) and arguments ($3, which should be an ordered
aggregate PMC).

The result is quite similar to using the system C<sprintf>, but is
protected against buffer overflows and the like.  There are some
differences, especially concerning sizes (which are largely ignored);
see F<misc.c> for details.


=cut

=item B<new>(out STR)

=item B<new>(out STR, in INT)

Allocate a new empty string of length $2 (optional).


=cut

=item B<stringinfo>(out INT, in STR, in INT)

Extract some information about string $2 and store it in $1.
If a null string is passed, $1 is always set to 0.
If an invalid $3 is passed, an exception is thrown.
Possible values for $3 are:

=over 4

=item 1 The location of the string buffer header.

=item 2 The location of the start of the string.

=item 3 The length of the string buffer (in bytes).

=item 4 The flags attached to the string (if any).

=item 5 The amount of the string buffer used (in bytes).

=item 6 The length of the string (in characters).

=back


=cut

=item B<upcase>(out STR, in STR)

Uppercase $2 and put the result in $1

=item B<upcase>(inout STR)

Uppercase $1 in place


=cut

=item B<downcase>(out STR, in STR)

Downcase $2 and put the result in $1

=item B<downcase>(inout STR)

Downcase $1 in place


=cut

=item B<titlecase>(out STR, in STR)

Titlecase $2 and put the result in $1

=item B<titlecase>(inout STR)

Titlecase $1 in place


=cut

=item B<join>(out STR, in STR, invar PMC)

Create a new string $1 by joining array elements from array $3
with string $2.

=item B<split>(out PMC, in STR, in STR)

Create a new Array PMC $1 by splitting the string $3 into pieces
delimited by the string $2. If $2 does not appear in $3, then return $3
as the sole element of the Array PMC. Will return empty strings for
delimiters at the beginning and end of $3

Note: the string $2 is just a string. If you want a perl-ish split
on regular expression, use C<PGE::Util>'s split from the standard library.


=cut

=item B<charset>(out INT, in STR)

Return the charset number $1 of string $2.

=item B<charsetname>(out STR, in INT)

Return the name $1 of charset number $2.
If charset number $2 is not found, name $1 is set to null.

=item B<find_charset>(out INT, in STR)

Return the charset number of the charset named $2. If the charset doesn't
exist, throw an exception.

=item B<trans_charset>(inout STR, in INT)

Change the string to have the specified charset.

=item B<trans_charset>(out STR, in STR, in INT)

Create a string $1 from $2 with the specified charset.

Both functions may throw an exception on information loss.


=cut

=item B<encoding>(out INT, in STR)

Return the encoding number $1 of string $2.

=item B<encodingname>(out STR, in INT)

Return the name $1 of encoding number $2.
If encoding number $2 is not found, name $1 is set to null.

=item B<find_encoding>(out INT, in STR)

Return the encoding number of the encoding named $2. If the encoding doesn't
exist, throw an exception.

=item B<trans_encoding>(inout STR, in INT)

Change the string to have the specified encoding.

=item B<trans_encoding>(out STR, in STR, in INT)

Create a string $1 from $2 with the specified encoding.

Both functions may throw an exception on information loss.


=cut

=item B<is_cclass>(out INT, in INT, in STR, in INT)

Set $1 to 1 if the codepoint of $3 at position $4 is in
the character class(es) given by $2.


=cut

=item B<find_cclass>(out INT, in INT, in STR, in INT, in INT)

Set $1 to the offset of the first codepoint matching
the character class(es) given by $2 in string $3, starting
at offset $4 for up to $5 codepoints.  If no matching
character is found, set $1 to (offset + count).


=cut

=item B<find_not_cclass>(out INT, in INT, in STR, in INT, in INT)

Set $1 to the offset of the first codepoint not matching
the character class(es) given by $2 in string $3, starting
at offset $4 for up to $5 codepoints.  If the substring
consists entirely of matching characters, set $1 to (offset + count).


=cut

=item B<escape>(out STR, invar STR)

Escape all non-ascii chars to backslashed escape sequences. A
string with charset I<ascii> is created as result.

=item B<compose>(out STR, in STR)

Compose (normalize) a string.


=cut

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2001-2008, Parrot Foundation.

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software. It is subject to the same license
as the Parrot interpreter itself.


=cut

